**How to use Horary Points to Relieve Jet Lag Symptoms**

## What is Jet Lag?

Jet lag is a pattern of symptoms that a traveler may experience as they
are thrust into a time zone that is vastly different from what the body
is used to experiencing. Some of these symptoms may include fatigue,
nausea, headache, reduced memory, attention problems and disturbed sleep
patterns.

## What is the circadian rhythm?

Life is filled with rhythms and cycles. For all of us, the solar, lunar
and daily cycle are clearly evident. And within our daily cycle are many
documented circadian rhythms[^1] that medical science is anxious to
explore.[^2] Even our cells keep time[^3] The most familiar cycle for us
is the sleep/awake cycle.

## What happens in Jet Lag?

Jet lag occurs when our circadian rhythm becomes distorted. The primary
culprit is the change in the diurnal cycle of light and dark cycles are
acclimated to. Melatonin, produced in the brain, increases at nighttime
and turns off in bright light. The body expects this and is part of the
basis of our circadian rhythm.

**Jet lag occurs when the circadian rhythm uncouples with the diurnal
rhythm**.

## Where do Chinese medicine fit in?

Chinese medicine, since its foundation, has recognized the significance
of the body\'s rhythms.[^4] It postulates that the body has an internal
24-hour clock where the 12 different organs have prominence at specific
2-hour period of time as shown in the clock-like diagram below. Each
two-hour peak is called the \"horary period\" and it represent the
fundamental biological circadian clock according to Chinese Medicine.

And science has shown that acupuncture works! "...acupuncture can
stimulate the peripheral biological clock by affecting clock genes and
their associated protein expressions"[^5] Those studies, using lab
animals, utilized many different acupuncture points. The real question
for us is how, as travelling humans, can we use acupressure to change
our circadian rhythm as we travel?

## How to use this for Jet Lag?

The critical insight came in 1978 where Willem Khoe recommended using
specific acupuncture point from the horary chart to treat jet lag[^6].
John Amaro picked up on this and took it to a more detailed
level.[^7][^8] Today, we put the theory and empirical evidence into
practice with JetLagPro.

## Why Jet Lag Pro?

Anyone can look up the timezone of their destination and make a chart of
the points to use for their travels. But having an app do that for you
makes it easier. All the hard work is done, including reminders and
point diagrams along with videos for each point. JLP is an efficient
tool to hell you get over Jet Lag!

![](./image1.jpg){width="2.67in" height="2.67in"}

[^1]: Circadian Clocks and Vascular Function, **Circulation Research,
    Volume 106, Number 5**

    [**[Link]{.underline}**](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.211706)

[^2]: Foundations of circadian medicine, PLoS Biol. 2022 Mar
    24;20(3):e3001567.\
    [[Link]{.underline}](https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.3001567)

[^3]: The Mammalian Circadian Timing System and the Suprachiasmatic
    Nucleus as Its Pacemaker, Biology 2019, 8(1), 13;
    [[Link]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6466121/)

[^4]: Huangdi Bashiyi Nanjing (黃帝八十一難經) "The Yellow Emperor\'s
    Canon of Eighty-One Difficult Issues"

[^5]: Acupuncture in circadian rhythm sleep--wake disorders and its
    potential neurochemical mechanisms
    [Link](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnins.2024.1346635/full)

[^6]: Khoe, Willem H. Treatment of jet lag syndrome by
    acupuncture. *American Journal of Acupuncture* Vol. 6 No. 2 June
    1978, pp. 135-139

[^7]: Amaro, John. An ancient approach to beating 20th century jet
    lag. *Dynamic Chiropractic* March 1, 1989, pp. 12-17

[^8]: Amaro, John. Cheating time - an ancient approach to beating 20th
    century jet lag. *Dynamic Chiropractic* April 1, 1989, pp. 14-16
